This is an interview with Pete Hamer by Kathy Hamer
on Saturday, December 3, 1988 at his home in
Temple, Texas concerning the Vietnam War. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge about the
war, I'm going to donate this tape to the Texas A&M
Oral History Collection in the University
Archives. Is that alright with you? Yes.
Okay, could you please give me your full name?
Peter Thomas Hamer. Okay, and when and where were
you born? I was born in New York City in 1940, May
1940. Okay, and what kind of family life did you
have? What kind of childhood? Well... Typical?
Well, I don't think so. Typical to what? Mommy and
Daddy. Daddy went to work and my mother stayed home
and took care of me and my brother. We lived mostly
in apartments until I was about 15 or so, and then we
bought a cheap house in a poor neighborhood, but we
had a house. And,
like, you know, that's how typically, I guess it's
typical. What type of education did you have? I
still have it. Okay. Okay. Yeah, well, elementary
school, high school. I went to junior college in
Staten Island. for two years. Was your father or
grandfathers in any of the wars? No, no. Nobody in
my family was ever in the war except a
great-grandfather who was in the Union Navy
during the Civil War. He was an Irish immigrant. I
saw a picture of him once. But no, nobody else in
the... I had an uncle who was in the World War II, but
he was married my mother's sister and he was a
sergeant in the army and then became a warrant
officer. Um, how and why and when did you join the
military?
Well, I, how? I went down to the recruiting office
and signed up. There were recruiting offices all
over and all
you had to do was Go in there, they had nice signs
hanging up. It looked like everybody was having
such a great time. In New York, there were
recruiting officers all over the place. And how
did I join up? I went down and joined up. I was a
volunteer back when most people were draftees in
the Army. You have to understand, back in the late
50s and early 60s, the draft was still in effect.
All young men were subject to the draft. In fact,
that was a rite of passage. When you were 18, you
went down and got your draft card. That was kind of
like an ID card. You could buy booze and drink beer
in the clubs and bars and stuff like that. So that
was like a coming of age. Here in Texas, it's
getting your driver's license at age 16. In New
York, it was getting your draft card when you were
18. That meant you could drink legally. But the
draft was still in place. In fact, when I got into
the Army, Oh, 80, 85%, 90% of the guys that I was in
the Army were draftees, guys that had, who had been
drafted. No, I was a, what do you call it, regular
Army. I didn't, I had joined up. I wasn't drafted at
all. Why, why did you leave? Well, you have to
understand how it is to be in the, in the lower
classes in New York. You don't have a lot of
options. You think of a, you know, in New York
everything is just great. That's the big apple of
the world to us, but it isn't true. There's a lot of
barriers that exist if you don't have the dough or
if you don't have the background to, to draw upon.
Nobody in my family had ever been to college. All I
ever heard from my folks was how broke they were all
the time. It was, It wasn't hand to mouth and my
father always worked, but there was almost an
attitude that this noble poverty is great for you.
Buy the cheapest and make it last the longest.
I had to get out of that and I couldn't figure any
other way to do it other than by joining the
military and get out of New York and seeing some of
the world and maybe opening some doors.
Navy, the Air Force, or Marines, whatever it was,
because the Army had some really good
opportunities for getting a commission,
becoming a commissioned officer, and I saw that as
a ticket. So, yeah, how did I join the Recruit
North? Why did I join? I wanted to increase the
scope of my life. It sounds corny, but it's true.
And when did I join? I joined right after I
graduated from junior college. I'd been married
about a year and a half.
February 2nd, 1962, I enlisted specifically for
the infantry. Now, that's another story. I'd
taken two years at Union College in mechanical
technology, which is like the first two years of
mechanical engineering. And when I went down to
the recruiting office, they had a bunch of little
tests that they gave me, and I scored very high on
mechanical aptitude. Of course, I would have
because of the training I just had received.
to work on the Army's research and development
facility in New Mexico, White Sands, New Mexico,
testing all these big missiles out. And I was all
set for that, and I thought about it. I said, being
in the Army means being a soldier, not a grease
monkey. So I went back to that same recruiting
sergeant, and I said, look, change it. Sign me up
for the infantry. So I joined the infantry. I went
on active duty, and I... My first few years in the
Army spent as an infantryman. Did you ever expect
that you'd be going to war? Yeah. Didn't know where
or when or how. We thought it would be in Europe. The
focus then, remember the war in Berlin in 1961?
August of 1961, the Russians put a wall up around
Berlin, West Berlin. And everybody in the world
thought we were going to go to war. and it was the
Cuban Missile Crisis, remember that? Yeah, that
was in October of 62, I believe. At that time,
nobody knew where Vietnam was. I mean, it was just,
so what?
When I was in basic training, my drill instructor
was Sergeant Jose Tamayo, and Sergeant Tamayo
said, I can't wait till we, get this class over, I'm
going to volunteer to go to South Vietnam, he
called it. Because he knew there was something
going on there, but he didn't know exactly what the
name of it was. He knew it was over in the Pacific
somewhere, but he thought it would be a good career
move for him to become an advisor in South Vietnam.
But now everybody's thinking Europe. Nobody
thought about Vietnam in 1961, 62. Nobody knew
where the hell it was.
There was nothing on the media about it. It was
really, you know, pop media. Maybe in some
esoteric academic journal somewhere, some Ph.D.
candidate was writing an article about a marriage
that was involved in Southeast Asia. The other
thing was somebody did a story about a Dr. Tom
Dooley in Laos who was, apparently was killed by
the communists there. He became a martyr by the
John Birch Society back then. But no, I was
thinking Europe. Most of what focused was Europe.
How long were you in the Army before you went to
Vietnam? Okay, I joined in 62, in February 62. I
went to Vietnam in January 1968. Early January,
January 7th. That date should be significant to
you because A couple of weeks after I got to Vietnam
is when they had that Tet Offensive. So you were
there for the Tet Offensive? Oh, yeah. I was there
for the Tet Offensive. I was there for 11 months.
And every time we participated in the campaign,
you'd get a little bronze star to put on your
Vietnam service ribbon. After 11 months, I had
five of those little bronze stars. Five major
campaigns in 11 months. And that's kind of like the
invasion of Normandy every couple of months.
That's what took the campaign to where
everybody's kicking up. Now that's had a fence up.
When I got to Vietnam, everybody thought the war
was over. Yeah. Had the bad guys on the run. That's
the basic case. Your expectations when you got
there, did you think you were not going to be there
very long? Well, I know I was going to be there for
the full year. As soon as you got off the plane, you
could see that was the 51st state. That was part of
the United States with a half a million troops
there. We had to run out of the country. We could do
anything we wanted there except at night. We got a
little lonely out there in the jungle. During the
daytime, we knew we were out of the country. Of
course, we couldn't see through the dirt, and
that's where all the bad guys were, was hiding
underground in their tunnels and stuff. We didn't
know that. Did you think you could win when you got
there? You thought it was going to? be a victory for
the United States? Sure. No doubt about it. And it
was a victory for the United States. You think the
entire war was a victory for the United States?
Sure. Militarily. As long as the American
soldiers were there on the ground, the military of
the Vietnamese could never have taken that
country over.
The kids from the farms and ranches and the
factories and the streets of the cities, went over
there and did a super job. Man, they went 10,000
miles from home against
popular opinion, doing their duty like John F.
Kennedy said, ask not what your country can do for
you, but what you can do for your country. Full of
those ideals, they went over there. The martyred
president's famous words to the young
generation. They went over there. They
shouldered that burden that the government
placed upon them. And they did a damn good job. They
kicked Charlie's ass up and down that country.
Every time that we had a contact with the North
Vietnamese or the Viet Cong, we kicked their ass.
Every time.
Alright, and this one, and that country didn't
fall to the North Vietnamese until every soldier
from the United States went back home. Look that up
in your history book. And that's what really
stokes me. People say we lost the war in Vietnam. We
didn't lose a damn thing in Vietnam. We didn't lose
that war at all. What happened is the people at home
lost the will to propagate the war. So you think it
could have been won if it weren't? Oh, sure. How
many years and how much money? No, no, no. See, the
American people don't realize what a wonderful
military establishment they had. They have
officers and enlisted men who are superbly
trained. You have no idea. In my almost 12 years of
being in the Army, almost a third of that time was
spent in one school or another.
So we knew how to win that war if the American
people, through their government,
wanted to win it. See, that's the thing about a war.
In Vietnam, the objective, the political
objective of the war was not to defeat the enemy,
but to get the enemy to the negotiating table. That
was the objective of the Vietnam War. You've been
studying that. Do you think we could have won World
War II if our objective was to get Hitler to the
negotiating table? No. to get Jorahito or Tojo to
the negotiating table? No. The objective in those
wars was the total and unconditional defeat of the
enemy. Now, could the American military
accomplish that in Vietnam? Yeah, we estimated we
could do that in two weeks. He could win the war in
two weeks? Two weeks, maximum. How's that? By
approaching that conflict, that war, as a total
war,
maneuver to get the North Vietnamese to agree to
some political solution in the South. What would
be involved in a total war? Just like, do you
remember bombing Japan with nuclear weapons? Or
saturation bombing of the cities in Germany?
Total war means all of the resources of one nation
are focused to commit war on another nation. So you
think we should have used nuclear weapons? We
didn't need to use nuclear weapons in North
Vietnam because it's a third world country and
very small. Conventional munitions would have
worked very nicely. Didn't we use more bombs in
Vietnam, though, than they did in World War II? I
want to know about that, but most of those bombs
fell out where nobody lived. So you think if we
would have bombed the population? Sure, just like
we did in World War II, in Japan, and in Germany.
Unfortunately, we might have blown up Jane Fonda
if we did, and we wouldn't have had the benefit of
all her marvelous artistic and exercise
endeavors to draw upon for this generation.
Did you do just a slight note of sarcasm? Just a
touch. What did you think, then, of the Vietnamese
people? Well, let's go back a little further.
Okay. You talked about when did I join the army and
why and all that kind of stuff. Now, all of a sudden,
we left out six years of my life. Your training,
your military career before Vietnam. Sure, you
want to hear that? That's very interesting. Okay.
Sure. See, I was a gung-ho son of a bitch, and that's
the truth. I enlisted infantry. When I got into
basic training, after getting issued my uniform
and a short haircut, they made me an acting
sergeant. Mainly because I was bigger than
everybody else. I was six feet tall and weighed
about 195 pounds. So I was a squad leader in basic
training. And then after basic training, before I
went to what they call advanced individual
training, in my case it would have been special
infantry school, they sent me to a two-week
leadership school for guys who had shown some
leadership potential. See, the Army was testing
you and cultivating you all the way I went to this
leadership school, and I graduated second in my
class out of about 60 guys. And I went to my infantry
school company, and I was made a platoon leader,
platoon sergeant, acting platoon sergeant. I've
been in the Army about 14, 15
weeks now, 18, 20 weeks, and I'm an acting sergeant
again. There's times that having 20 guys I'm in
charge of, I've got about 60. And I was getting
pretty good at leading men. I went over to graduate
from what we called 11-11-1-1-1. That's basic
infantryman with a gun school. And, oh, you have no
idea what they trained you to do. You think, oh,
just stick them with a knife and shoot a gun off. No.
We got to be able to shoot an M1 rifle, a World War II
rifle. an M1 rifle at 500 yards so that I could hit a
man-sized target consistently at 500 yards.
That's not with a telescope on the rifle or
anything, that's just with my old eyeball. And how
to navigate across unknown terrain with nothing
but a map and a compass to go for miles at night.
First aid, communications, operation of various
infantry-type vehicles, supply procedures,
logistics, leadership, plus a healthy dose of
things that may surprise a lot of people, but at
least have classes in ethics for infantrymen. The
rules of war, the Geneva Convention, the American
Code of Conduct, the treatment of prisoners, what
was expected of you if you should become a
prisoner, Some people would call that nothing
more than propaganda, but it's not. It's
not. You're talking about young men who were
taking informative years, and as part and parcel
of their training were taught technical things,
but they were also taught ethical standards. And
some guys, this is the first time in their life they
were ever taught ethics. What's the right way to
treat women and children? How do you treat a
prisoner of war? What about the duties and
responsibilities you have to your comrades, to
your buddies? Can you believe that? You find it
hard to believe? It's true. Okay, so my first duty
station of all places, since I had enlisted for the
infantry in Europe, they sent me to Berlin. Now,
this is where the world was watching. I got there in
July of 1962, 11 months after the Berlin Wall was
put up. I was assigned to eight company, 6th United
States Infantry, 2nd Battle Group. The Army at
that time had been organized in battle groups. It
was five maneuver companies, A, B, C, D, and E.
Combat Support Company, which was heavy mortars
and reconnaissance. And Headquarters Company,
which is the engineers and the medics and the clerk
typists in the personnel section. Battle Group
Maintenance and things like that. Battle Group
was a huge organization. was two battle groups in
Berlin, and one tank company and an artillery
company, and we were supposed to stop the
Russians, who had 25 divisions. We always
estimated that in Berlin we'd last about 30
seconds, but it'd be a hell of an interesting 30
seconds, and in Berlin that was a spit and polish
outfit. We had a parade every Saturday, and
special ceremonies, but we trained real hard. We
used to run night problems, and we used to have, we
had a mock sitting and all we did was train combat in
the city. And they're doing that in Fort Hood right
now. They have a little city out there and they're
trying to teach these guys that it's real
difficult to fight in the city. You can't take a
foxhole and go up a street. You have to be real. So
there was a lot of training. We were issued M14s
when I got over there. We used to go to West Germany
once a year so we could fire all our big weapons, the
.50 calibers 7.62 machine guns, which we really
didn't have a place to fire those in Berlin, fire
the mortars and fire the artillery and
participate in some other type of maneuvering.
One of the things we used to train for in Berlin was
riot control. Believe it or not, it was estimated
that if the Russians wasn't going to take over the
city, there'd be big riots in West Berlin. Believe
it or not, there was a tremendous population, part
of the population of West Berlin back in the early
60s that were pro-communist, that were Russian
sympathizers. Sounds strange, but so we felt that
there was going to be an effort by the Russians to
take over West Berlin by force. The spearhead was
going to be these
civilians who would propagate internal unrest,
if you will. So I was in Berlin, I went all the way up
to PFC when I was in Berlin. I got a little distant,
but I could read and write fairly well, because I
had two years of college, so I went special duty to
the battle group headquarters, and I became a
sports writer. I was at PFC, and I wrote little
articles for the newspaper. I was still on the
literature unit, but they wanted to put me in
there. After about a year of that, I finally got an
appointment to go to Austin Candidate School at
Fort Benning. I had to apply for that. So I returned
about a year later, I guess it was in the summer of
1964 on a troop ship. I went over on a troop ship,
came back on a troop ship and that's a whole, that's
a whole new story I could tell you about taking a
train from Bremerhaven, Germany all the way
across East Germany and to Berlin at night and
seeing the Russians as a young fella seeing us all
for the first time. That's another story. But
coming back from the United States, when I came
back on a troop ship, the sailing on the, into New
York Harbor, Army, Navy, Army carrier, sailing
under the Verrazano Regiment, it was still under
construction at that time. Most of the guys that
were on that troop ship were being discharged from
the military, from the Army, going home. Not me, I
was just getting started. So here I was with about
two years under my belt and I was looking forward to
going to OCS. I was in infantry officer school at
Fort Benning, Georgia. And that's the next stop. I
was married at the time I joined the Army,
incidentally. Your mom and I lived in Berlin in a
bombed out building, right near the German
border.
We had to take baths together because that's all
the hot water we could eat. Really? But it was nice.
We had a little dog with us, kept us warm. Coldest
winter in a hundred years. The Baltic Sea froze
that year. It was like being in the North Pole. But
that wasn't very hard for me. A lot of hardship
always broke. You tend to regress those things.
You remember the good things. And it was great.
So, off I am to Fort Benning, Georgia to go to
infantry officer school. Again, this whole focus
of the American army is still on the conventional
war in Europe, the sub-nuclear war in Europe. You
believe that? This is 1963. Vietnam is nine years
old already, because that thing started with
Eisenhower in 1954. Nine years, no wait, even
though we're Vietnam I. Now that was an eye-opener
going to Fort Benning. Why? You ever hear of the
Green Berets?
Mm-hmm. In my, here I am, I got a whole year as an
infantry private under my belt, half the time was
spent either in a parade or right banging on a
typewriter doing sports columns for the battle
group newspaper. I'm still a private, PFC E3, RA
12656209,
still
I want an appointment to go to OCS. And I check in. I
see all these guys, staff sergeants, sergeant
first class, buck sergeants, green berets,
paratroopers out of the 101st or 82nd Airborne
Division. Some sharp, tough guys from 10, 15
years, some
of them. Unbelievable.
And we're talking about some guys who had been CIA
type kind of like one of the guys, Herman Halteman,
big guy, he was 34 years old, sergeant for his
class, Green Beret. He got a special waiver
because of his age to go to Oxford Candidate
School. And this guy had been working for the CIA
for years in Eastern Europe. He spoke German,
Russian, Hungarian, Czechoslovakian. He had
like four or five hundred
Second Lieutenant. Interesting. Scary. Well,
when you get to OCS, they take all your stripes and
ribbons and everything, and everybody wears the
same uniform, so you can't tell whether the guys,
the next gentleman I got there just turned slob
like myself. Were you pretty gun-hard? Oh, yeah.
Everybody was. Now, Austin County School is six
months long, and about half of the guys drop out.
They can't take the stripes. They can't take the
pressure. We used to call it pressure
is to place you under enormous stress, because
war, combat, is a lot of stress.
Some people get stressed out if they break the
shoelace.
And those kind of guys, they couldn't hack it as an
officer. You know, you start as second
lieutenant, you're responsible for the lives of
40 guys. As a company commander, you're
responsible for about 150, 180 guys. A battalion
commander, running from 800 to 1,000, brigade
commander, maybe 5,000 guys. Division
commander, anywhere from 12 to 24,000 guys. So,
you gotta, the one thing that they emphasized at
OCS was responsibility, responsibility,
responsibility. Responsibility to the nation
and responsibility to your men.
And you can't fulfill those responsibilities if
you Blow your gourd if you feel icebergs. You've
got to be able to take a lot of heat, and that's what
they throw at you, and that's the reason for it. And
you want to talk about training. That school is six
months long. Did you feel it prepared you well for
Vietnam? Oh, yeah, sure. It prepared me well for
the rest of my life.
Sure. Did they teach you anything about guerrilla
warfare? Sure. Sure, what do you think? And at Fort
Benning,
besides running, they call it the infantry
school. What is guerrilla warfare? Nothing more
than infantry tactics on a small unit level. We
studied Chairman Mao and his principles of
guerrilla warfare. You've got to know your enemy,
right? We studied the Russian partisan actions in
World War II. We studied a lot of things. We studied
Quantrell and his Raiders in the Civil War and how
they used various guerrilla tactics.
We also, as
students, would study other approaches to
warfare, like warfare being an extension of
political objectives.
The one thing that we came to realize
when it came to warfare.
That would be very prophetic later on in the early
70s.
But getting back to Fort Benning was great
training. And you graduated from there as a second
lieutenant, and you felt in your mind, you knew
that there was nothing that you could not achieve.
That's not much self-confidence. We figured half
of your peer group has dropped out because of lack
of motivation or self-discipline or inability to
cope with stress. That means those who did
graduate were pretty damn tough
and tell you how down-to-earth I was. I was a pretty
good student. I graduated, I guess, in the upper
third of my class and that's, that's pretty good
academically.
I excelled at some of the technical subjects, and I
was very good at communications. I enjoyed
working in communications.
You give me a flashlight battery and a piece of
wire, and I could talk to anybody, almost. And I was
very, very good at map and compass work. This would
prove to be important later on, because I
transferred from the Infrared to Sigma Corps.
Well, when I graduated, I was planning to go to
airborne ranger school. And that's a paratrooper
school and nine weeks ranger training in Fort
Benning in Florida and up in the mountains of
someplace out, I guess it was in Georgia.
And, but instead I went to communication school.
And that was a 10-week course in combat
communication. And I went back to Europe as a
second lieutenant. I was assigned to an infantry
brigade headquarter, and I was the
communications platoon leader as an infantry
officer. I was the communications platoon and
headquarters company of the 3rd Brigade, 8th
Division. It was my job to maintain
communications and supervise the men who
actually provided the communications for the
brigade headquarters. Big job. That's a homely
story. I spent three years in that job in Germany,
in the 8th Division. Was that in Mannheim? That's
in Mannheim, Germany. Coleman Barracks in
Sandhofen, Germany was right outside of
Mannheim.
While there, towards the end of that tour, I
transferred to Signal Corps and then came back to
the United States and went to the Signal Officers
Career Course. I was a captain by now. And went to
the signal officer career course at Fort
Monmouth, and that's where your sister Jennifer
was born in 1967 in August. But it's an interesting
thing. By 1966 now, Vietnam was starting to build
up. This gave me quite a buildup. And an infantry
battalion, and I was in an infantry battalion. I
was a battalion communications officer. That's
on the operation staff. It's the staff officer's
job. You know, you have a platoon of guys, but the
platoon's hardly running.
While I was there, I had put in my branch transfer
for Signal Corps. So, if there's a pending
personnel action, they can't, you're kind of
flagged. They can't really give you another
personnel action until that one is resolved. So, I
had I wasn't thinking Vietnam, I was just thinking
long-term career, because that was definitely a
career I was in for the 20 or 30 year. The...
All of a sudden, in 1966, all of our officers, even
guys who had only been there a short period of time,
were getting orders to go back to the States. The
8th Division was being stripped of officers
because they were constituting the 9th Infantry
Division, I think it was in Fort Lewis. They were
reactivating the 9th Infantry Division and they
were going to send that whole division to Vietnam.
Well, you just don't overnight get lieutenants
and captains and majors. You've got to take the
ones that are there, so you strip from the other
units. Our battalion was stripped of officers.
The battalion commander was gone. All of the staff
officers were gone. All of the captains that were
company commanders were gone. All of the
lieutenants were gone. All of a sudden, they had
like one week to pack up and go to the States.
Because I had this branch transfer request in,
they didn't call me. So all of a sudden, my branch
transfer comes through, and here is the weirdest
company in the United States Army. I'm the company
commander. I'm a captain or a first lieutenant.
company commander of headquarters and
headquarters company
of 2nd Battalion, 13th Infantry.
And I'm a signal corps lieutenant, commanding an
infantry company. That wasn't so strange. The
battalion commander was a captain who was in the
adjutant general's corps. He was a paper pusher.
And I had, in my headquarters and headquarters
company, more firepower than General George
Patton had in World War II, because they had a Davy
Crockett section that fired nuclear weapons. I
had, I was a first lieutenant single corps in the
infantry, and I, and I had nuclear weapons
capability in Germany, and my boss was a captain in
the paper person corps. Then we kind of know that
something was going on, that's for sure, there's
something going on in Vietnam. The, they stripped
us clean. I transferred to a signal corps unit
there for about six or eight months and we got my
orders to... that's the thing about being in the
signal corps, you can pick up the telephone and you
can go to Washington all the time and I got the boys
at the signal branch headquarters to assign me to
Fort Monmouth, New Jersey to go to this school. By
then I had me captain
Mommy Jean was pregnant with Jennifer, and I
didn't want to go to Vietnam while she was
pregnant. I wouldn't want to have a baby while I was
away at the war. And
Monmouth was right close to where our families
were in New York City. It's only about a 40-minute
drive from New York City. So it worked out. The
signal branch boy said, yeah, we'll send you to
school, and then you'll be going to Vietnam. I
said, great. That seemed like a normal, natural
career progression. Let's take a little break
here, okay? At Fort Monmouth, we were talking
about what was going on. That was a career course
and still the bulk of the training, of course,
Sigma Corps being responsible for military
communications was, we were trained to be
managers of large communications networks and
systems and all the technical things that
involved in that.
But the main thrust of all our tactical and
strategic type training was still the European
conventional warfare. Divisions moving here,
armies moving here. And some
training time was devoted towards what was going
on in Vietnam. Surprisingly enough, as a
professional officer, what was more interesting
in 1967 in Vietnam was the Arab-Israeli Seven-Day
War. You remember that, in 1967? That's where the
Jews whooped everybody's butt in about a week.
Yeah, you might have heard about that, I'm sure. We
were more interested in that than we were in what
was going on in Vietnam, because Vietnam still in
1967 was thought to be a so what type endeavor. I
mean, it was something that we knew as
professional soldiers that if the government
gave us the green light, we could wrap that up in a
couple of weeks. So you expected to be a short
victory? Yeah, if the politicians would ever get
off their ass and let us go in there and win it.
What's interesting now is we're starting to hear
about friends, guys we've served with, getting
wounded or being killed over there. Remember 1962
is when I came in, went to OCS in 63, 64. A couple of my
classmates from OCS had been killed in Vietnam by
now. Oh, in 67? Well by this time, one guy was an
advisor, he got killed. Uh, Greenlightsville had
three daughters, three young daughters, used to
go to church with them. He got killed over there
right after I went to Europe, I heard about that.
And uh, you start hearing about guys that got, like
my company commander, a guy by the name of
Richardson, in the 8th Division, in A Company. I
was a platoon leader for him, he was a company
commander. He had gone over there as a major and
stepped on a landline and blew his leg off. He
wasn't killed, but his military career was over.
So you start hearing about guys now that you knew,
well I said it was personal, it's not academic
anymore. Guys that you served with,
professionals themselves who Now the academics
are over, now this is a real situation. It kind of
makes you think now all of a sudden you could
possibly be in that situation yourself. But
Vietnam was still not the number one priority as
far as the military mission was concerned. We're
still at war in Europe. We were very concerned
about that. Europe. Vietnam we knew, we knew to
wrap that thing up in a couple of weeks. And our
strategy that we had developed at the signal
school and our strategy and tactics and peer
instruction, the most viable way to bring North
Vietnamese to their knees to win unconditional
surrender, blockade their harbors,
bomb saturate, bomb their cities, and then if you
get a map of North Vietnam, you see the Red River?
The Red River is protect, the land surrounding the
Red River is the crop producing lands of North
Vietnam. It's all protected by dikes. Just go in
here and blow up the dikes. Flood them. Flood them
out and all their food production would cease.
It's very easy to close the border that they have
with China because it's so small, such a small
area. So it made a problem to do that. So we had the
power to accomplish all those things. We could
send those people back to the Stone Age in two
weeks. And it was viable. It could be done. But we
didn't have the political green light.
But yeah, that strategy could have been attained,
no problem. We never did that. Do you think it
should have been done? Yeah, sure. You should
never commit your soldiers to fight in a war where
the objective of that war is to win.
You should never commit your troops where the
objective of the war is not clear, like in Vietnam.
The objective there was not clear. The objective
there was to somehow encourage the North
Vietnamese to enter into a negotiated
settlement. Why do you think the United States
wanted to...what was the goal? What was the goal?
Uh-huh. To protect the world from communism? No.
There's a principle called precedent, which
presidents, like courts, do the same thing. The
Monroe Doctrine is a classic example. President
Monroe has been dead many, many years now, but yet
his doctrine is still, quote, alive. End quote.
It's ailing, but it's still alive. American
policy had really not changed since President
Eisenhower. President Kennedy, President
Johnson. It was still a policy to somehow prevent
further extensions of communist governments
throughout the world. Kind of build fences so they
said, okay, what you've got, you've got, you can't
get any more. And the domino theory and if we didn't
win in Vietnam, it'd be a bloodbath. Well, that was
true. Look what happened in Cambodia. But There
was no stated desire to achieve a military victory
there. If the President of the United States had
called up the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and said, look, I'm going to take two weeks off at
Camp David. When I come back, I want that thing to be
over. Do what you think is necessary, short a
nuclear war, but have this thing wound up in two
weeks. We had the resources and the military
combat power to do that. We could have wound that
thing up in two weeks.
Sure. And we wouldn't even have to fly one
airplane. Send a battleship to New Jersey over
there. And a couple of salvos would have taken out
Hanoi. They would have taken out Haiphong.
Any ship coming or going out of their ports, blown
out of the water, and all of a sudden, they're going
to start losing interest in that war. There's an
old joke that says, we could win the war, but there
wouldn't be anybody on the enemy's side to come to
the surrender talk. Because those people were
real tough. They didn't believe in surrendering.
We just had to kill them all. But we could have done
it. It would have been easy. You would think that
would be fine? Sure. Uh-huh. If that's what the
government wanted to do, and if that was a stated
objective, you betcha. See, the guys in the Army
are early on taught that they are subordinate to
civilian authority. That's always been the case
in America. We are subordinate to civilian
authority. So it's not the soldiers who wage the
wars, it's the civilians. It's the professional
soldier who goes out and does the dirty work.
Are you with me? You follow what I'm saying? If the
civilian authority's stated objectives are
unclear,
well, the soldier still has to go out and do what he
can under the orders he's given. So they are...
What good is winning the country free from
communism, though, if there's no one left to live
there? Oh, well... Are you trying to protect the
people or the land area? We're not trying to
protect anybody. We're trying to kill them all. up
north, that was the enemy. But it was, it was
ridiculous. You're chasing some bad guys in the
jungle and all of a sudden it comes in a race that
says, stop, you can't go into Cambodia to pursue
them. That's ridiculous. It's like the old days of
Bonnie and Clyde where the police couldn't cross
state lines. So, you know, it was a strange
situation and from the military standpoint, from
a purely military standpoint, that war could have
been won as a conventional war. That is, total
destruction of the enemy's ability to wage war. We
could have done that. We had the power to do it. But
the civilian authorities didn't state that as an
objective. To this day, I'm not entirely sure what
they had in mind when they committed all the
soldiers there. I'm pretty sure what it was that
they wanted to show so much power, so much
determination, North Vietnamese would cave in
and say, okay, we'll negotiate. Of
course, we didn't understand their
determination. Do you think it would have helped
to know their culture and their people better?
Yeah. Did you know anything about them? Well, no.
We didn't know that much about the North
Vietnamese. I mean, who did? I mean, the French had
been living there. There had been a French colony
since who knows?
The French didn't understand that those people
had a very strong sense of national identity. They
didn't know that. They thought they were just
happy to be French members of a French colony. They
didn't realize that those people have been
fighting over that part of the world for 4,000
years. Everybody wants Vietnam. You know why
everybody wants Vietnam? Rice. Oh, do you think?
Sure. So do you think... Especially South
Vietnam. It's the rice bowl of the whole Asia. They
export rice like crazy. And especially since in
the 1950s, we introduced all those high yield
rices, you know, that trouble of triple the
acreage, the production for acreage. It's really
fascinating. But you get into just a little bit of
Vietnam history, and that country...